# Lecture 3 (Visualising Data: Plots)

### Reading

- [P4DA](https://wesmckinney.com/book/): chapter 9
- [R4DS](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/index.html): chapter 3

### Resources

- [Importance of
  visualisation](https://hdsr.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/zok97i7p/release/4)


## Summary 

In this lecture we will learn how to visualise data in terms of plots. We will
also look into the differences between plots and how to choose a suitable
visualisation method for a specific problem. Finally, we will conclude with and
example.


## Visualising Data

A ~~picture~~ *plot* is worth a thousand word, is a popular phrase, that conveys
the use the power of data visualisation. This is meant to convey the message
that you can understand more from a single image than a text of words. In our
case, when we analyse plots generated from the data we will be able to draw
deeper conclusions than we would have by just looking at the data through
tables. So far that is what we have been doing. Although tables of data are
great for, initial interpretation, transformation e.t.c, it lends us no way of
understanding the data. Visualising data in forms of images(plots), gives us a
tool to analyse the data and gain a deeper understanding of it, it enables us,
in most cases, to draw far deeper conclusion of the data than would be possible
otherwise.

### Chosing the Plot

There are many ways to represent the data, but one has to be mindfull of the
type of plot used. Really, the plot you use depends on the problem or analysis
you face with. For instance, using a
*[pie-chart](https://www.google.com/search?sca_esv=580414175&sxsrf=AM9HkKmReRixWg30xZlf46E5pBmGXXq6Kw:1699439464506&q=pie+chart&tbm=isch&source=lnms&sa=X&sqi=2&ved=2ahUKEwitmOWsmbSCAxWfCBAIHarWCZIQ0pQJegQIDhAB&biw=1470&bih=802&dpr=2)*
to represent proportions is great, but if you use it to represent something it
might be a bad idea. This is a general problem we will be faced with when
visualising data. We should aim to make the illustration understandable, not
only to the analyser, but also to others. That is why it is important to explain
the illustration and label it correctly. Seeing an image without context or
understanding will not only make the image uninterpretable, but it may, in
cases, lead the reader to draw the wrong conclusion. 

There are many plots that you should familiarise yourself with, for instance,
`line charts`, `scatter plots`, `bar plots`, `histograms`, `box-plots`,
`heatmaps` etc. You may already be familiar with some of them. There are,
ofcourse, a multitude of plots that you can work with. The idea is that you
should choose a plotting method based on the analysis. It should be easy to
interpret and draw conclusions from. Below, in the [Examples](#Examples),
section I will illustrate a few methods and plots used. 


## Examples

### Investing Apple or Google's

In the [data repository]() you can find the file `aapl_googl_price.csv`,
containing time series consisting of the closing prices for the both Apple and
Google stock. For the uninitated, the closing price is the price of the stock at
the end of the day when the stock market closes. For the pair we are studying
that is at *4 pm* New York time. The data look as like this

| Date                |   AAPL |   GOOG |
|:--------------------|-------:|-------:| | 2023-11-02 00:00:00 | 177.57 |
128.58 | | 2023-11-03 00:00:00 | 176.65 | 130.37 | | 2023-11-06 00:00:00 |
179.23 | 131.45 | | 2023-11-07 00:00:00 | 181.82 | 132.4  |

We want to investigate these stock prices to be able to make an educated
decision on a good investment plan. To begin with, it might be a good idea, to
look at stock returns instead of prices, this reduces the effects of the prices
having different magnitudes. That is, Apple trades at around 180 USD as of today
and Google at around 120 USD To create a return series, we can mutate the data
using the following formula; $R_t = \frac{P_t - P_{t-1}}{P_{t-1}}$. That is, the
*return* of a stock is the percentage increase (or decrease) from
close-to-close. Here we have denoted the price at time $t$ as $P_t$ and return
as $R_t$.

The first thing I want to look at is how correlated these stocks are, I can do
that by using a `scatter` plot.

![scatter-plot](/img/scatterplot.png) *Scatter plot of the returns of Apple and
Google stock close price.*

From the plot, we can see that there is a small positive correlation between the
pair. This indicates that the stock have some intrinsic commonalities. We can
expect that if the return is positive for Apple it is likely that it is positive
for Google aswell. This is bad! Key for investment is diversification. Ideally,
we would like correlation to close to zero. But, lets look deeper. 


